Fine-grained unused warnings (#434)
ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals: proposals/0000-fine-grained-unused-warnings.rst

.. contents::

This proposal aims to make warnings about unused names more precise.

Motivation
----------

::

  a :: Int
  a = 4
    where bar = foo
          foo = 3

Compiling the above code with ``-Wall`` results in the
these warnings:

::

      Defined but not used: `bar'
      Defined but not used: `foo'

Sometimes, I look at a warning like this and think "I could have sworn I used
``foo`` somewhere" - but of course, what the warning is trying to say isn't
actually that ``foo`` is unused, but rather that all of ``foo``'s usage sites
are in unused bindings.

Furthermore, while it's useful to see such a warning for CI, to immediately
know all of the bindings that have to be removed to eliminate the warnings,
during development, these additional warnings take up a lot of valuable
screen real estate in ghcid.

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------
The overarching idea is to separate warnings about names that are genuinely
unused, and warnings that are only "transitively unused" (or "indirectly unused"), i.e. only used by
other (transitively) unused bindings.

> The warnings about transitively unused names will be reported if a new flag, `-freport-indirectly-unsed-bindings` is enabled (by default, it is) *and* the appropriate existing warning flags about unused bindings is enabled, i.e. one of

Author: I actually did mean `indirectly-unused`. I've added that phrasing to alternatives, although I think I don't really like it, because I'm not sure what it means for a use to be indirect.

* ``-Wunused-top-binds``
* ``-Wunused-local-binds``
* ``-Wunused-pattern-binds``
* ``-Wunused-binds``
* ``-Wunused-foralls``
* ``-Wunused-matches``
* ``-Wunused-imports``
* ``-Wunused-type-patterns``

In each of these cases, if a name is not used by anything, the same warning will be produced that has been produced prior to this proposal.

For example, in the following code

::

  module Foo ()

  import Data.List as L

  foo = L.intercalate

``intercalate`` is transitively unused, since it is only used by ``foo``, which is unused. The warning that's produced will be

::

  Foo.hs:5:1: warning: [-Wunused-top-binds]
      Defined but not used: ‘foo’
  
  Foo.hs:3:1: warning: [-Wunused-imports, -freport-indirectly-used-bindings]:
      The import of `Data.List' is only used by the following unused binding: ‘foo’
        except perhaps to import instances from `Data.List'
      To import instances alone, use: import Data.List()

The warning about transitively unused bindings only appears if both the warning flag
for the unused binding (in this case ``-Wunused-top-binds``) and the the one for
the transitively unused binding itself (in this case ``-Wunused-imports``) are

> enabled.

Author: Good point, in this particular case it doesn't look like that would be a change from the current behavior, but in general it could happen that the number of warnings a code base produces changes, in cases where two warning flags interact. I've changed the text accordingly.

If ``foo`` is only used in a situation like

::

  bar = baz + 2
    where baz = foo * 2
	
and bar is unused, a question that arises is whether the warning about ``foo`` should reference ``bar``, or ``baz``.

In this particular case, since there would be no warning about ``baz`` being unused, it seem more helpful if the warning references ``bar``.

In general, a warning should only reference other bindings about which there is an "unused" warning.

In practice, that typically means warnings about transitively unused top-level bindings will tend to reference other top-level bindings, and warnings about transitively unused

> local bindings will reference other local bindings. However, if ``baz`` were unused, it would be referenced in the warning instead, since using ``bar`` in that case would not get rid of the warning about ``foo``.

Reviewer: I'm finding this section a bit hard to follow. It would be nice to nail down the specification a bit more precisely: instead of discussing hypothetical designs and what "should" be the case, can we give a clear definition of which bindings are included in the list? (By all means unpack the meaning of the definition with examples and discussion of why it is the right design.)

Author: I've rewritten the section, let me know what you think

> If a binding ``b`` is only used recursively, the warning message will say that it is only used in ``b``.

Reviewer: This doesn't seem to match the example, and indeed I think it is better to say that `b` is unused than to say to it is used only by itself.

If a group of bindings ``b1``, ..., ``bn`` is mutually recursive, and none of
the bindings are otherwise used, each of the bindings will be treated as transitively unused.
In this case, the binding site will reference the bindings of this group in whose definitions it directly occurs, e.g.

::

  Foo.hs:6:1: warning: [-Wunused-top-binds]
      ‘b1’ is defined but only used in the following unused bindings: ‘b2’, ‘b4’

Related warnings that are not affected by this proposal are ``-Wunused-pattern-bindings``,
``-Wunused-packages``, and ``-Wunused-do-bind``, since these are not about binding names.

Examples
--------

> NB: The only difference between these examples and how these warnings are currently presented is that the warnings about transitively unused bindings currently don't list the bindings in which they occur, and have the same phrasing as regular unused warnings - with the exception of the unused import warning and unused forall warnings, which don't currently occur if they are only transitively unused.

Author: I've removed the note and added the current warnings for comparison.

::

  module Foo () where

  import Data.List as L

  foo = L.intercalate bar

  bar = baz
    where baz = undefined
          quux = wibble
          wibble = worble
          worble = quux
        
  far :: forall a (b :: a) c . c
  far = far

::

  Foo.hs:3:1: warning: [-Wunused-imports, -freport-indirectly-used-bindings]:
      The import of ‘Data.List’ is only used by the following unused binding: ‘foo’
        except perhaps to import instances from ‘Data.List’
      To import instances alone, use: import Data.List()

  Foo.hs:5:1: warning: [-Wunused-top-binds]
      Defined but not used: ‘foo’

  Foo.hs:7:1: warning: [-Wunused-top-binds]

>       ‘bar' is defined but only used in the following unused binding: `foo’

Reviewer: Being pedantic, almost all occurrences of "only used" in the proposal should be "used only".

  Foo.hs:9:9: warning: [-Wunused-local-binds]
      ‘quux' is defined but only used in the following unused bindings: `worble', `wirble’

  Foo.hs:10:9: warning: [-Wunused-local-binds]
      ‘wibble' is defined but only used in the following unused binding: `worble’

  Foo.hs:11:9: warning: [-Wunused-local-binds]
      ‘worble' is defined but only used in the following unused binding: `wibble’

  Foo.hs:12:9: warning: [-Wunused-local-binds]
      Defined but not used: ‘wirble’

  Foo.hs:13:15: warning: [-Wunused-foralls]

>       Foo quantified type variable ‘a' is only used in the following unused variable: `(b :: a)’

Reviewer: "Foo" in this message and the one below seems out of place?

      In the type signature for ‘far’

  Foo.hs:13:17: warning: [-Wunused-foralls]
      Foo quantified type variable ‘(b :: a)’
      In the type signature for ‘far’

  Foo.hs:14:1: warning: [-Wunused-top-binds]
      Defined but not used: ‘far’

Effect and Interactions
-----------------------
For the most part, the effects of this proposal are minor. The only differences for existing
code-bases are that the warning message GHC prints for the transitive warnings

> is different.

Reviewer: And we get more warnings about indirectly unused imports and foralls, I think?

Since the warnings don't have any special formats, existing tools should be able to handle them without issues.

Users that don't wish to see warnings about transitively unused bindings can turn those warnings off.

Costs and Drawbacks
-------------------
The warning mechanism is somewhat more complicated and as a consequence might

> have a somewhat higher maintenance cost.

Reviewer: It is a bit of a shame that the new `-f` flag is somewhat separate from the `-W...` warning flag system, but changes which warnings are emitted. I wonder if there is a way to express this using warning groups (e.g. say that `-Wunused-imports` is split into `-Windirectly-unused-imports` + `-Wdirectly-unused-imports`, and have `-Wno-indirect-uses` to turn off all the "indirectly used" warnings at once). I haven't thought through all the consequences of this, though, and you may have considered it already.

Author: I've added it to alternatives. A point that came up earlier in discussion is people actually wanting less configurability, so from that point of view n + 1 flags (as in the current text) may be better than 2*n + 1 flags (or 3*n + 1, since we'd probably also want to keep the existing `-Wunused-imports`?). It's also not clear to me that having separate "indirectly unused" warnings for each category is something that would be used in practice.

Perhaps the `-f` flag in the text could simply be a `-W` name instead? Not sure if it'd be violating any implicit rules about how `-W` flags are supposed to work.

      Defined but not used: `bar'
      Defined but not used: `foo'

Sometimes, I look at a warning like this and think "I could have sworn I used
``foo`` somewhere" - but of course, what the warning is trying to say isn't
actually that ``foo`` is unused, but rather that all of ``foo``'s usage sites
are in unused bindings.

Furthermore, while it's useful to see such a warning for CI, to immediately
know all of the bindings that have to be removed to eliminate the warnings,
during development, these additional warnings take up a lot of valuable
screen real estate in ghcid.

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

The proposed change aims to distinguish between genuinely (or directly) unused bindings and transitively (or indirectly) unused bindings. While the warnings for directly unused bindings remain unchanged, the warnings for indirectly unused bindings will now be controlled by a new flag, ``-freport-indirectly-unused-bindings``.

**Criteria for Transitively Unused Bindings:**

1. **Directly Unused Bindings:** A binding is considered directly unused if it is not referenced in any part of the code. These bindings will generate the usual warnings as before.

> 2. **Transitively Unused Bindings:** A binding is classified as transitively unused if it is used only within other (directly or indirectly) unused bindings. The warning for these bindings will be reported only if ``-freport-indirectly-unused-bindings` and the relevant existing warning flags (e.g., ``-Wunused-top-binds``, ``-Wunused-local-binds``) are enabled.

Reviewer 2: What default value do you specify for `-freport-indirectly-unused-bindings`? My (rather strong) bias is to have it on by default.

(it does feel a little weird to me that this be a `-f` option, but maybe it's the best choice anyway)

Author: I'm definitely open to changing the flag prefix, although I'm not sure what would be better

3. **Recursive and Mutual Recursive Bindings** 
    - If a binding is used only recursively, it is treated as unused.
    - For mutually recursive bindings, if none of the bindings in the group are used outside their mutual recursion, each binding in the group is considered transitively unused. The warning for each binding will list the other bindings in the group it is directly involved with, e.g.

    ::
    
      Foo.hs:6:1: warning: [-Wunused-top-binds]
          ‘b1’ is defined but used only in the following unused bindings: ‘b2’, ‘b4’

4. **Import and `forall` Bindings:** The proposal also extends to warnings about transitively unused imports and ``forall`` binds. Both are considered to be unused if they are used only in definitions or type declarations of unused bindings, with the same direct vs. indirect distinction.

**Warning References and Messages:**

> - A binding will produce a warning if it is directly unused, or if it used only by bindings that are unused *and* produce a warning about being unused

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A binding will produce a warning if either
  - it is directly unused, or
  -  it used only by bindings that are unused *and* produce a warning about being unused (and `-freport-indirectly-unused-bindings` is on)
```

      Defined but not used: `foo'

Sometimes, I look at a warning like this and think "I could have sworn I used
``foo`` somewhere" - but of course, what the warning is trying to say isn't
actually that ``foo`` is unused, but rather that all of ``foo``'s usage sites
are in unused bindings.

Furthermore, while it's useful to see such a warning for CI, to immediately
know all of the bindings that have to be removed to eliminate the warnings,
during development, these additional warnings take up a lot of valuable
screen real estate in ghcid.

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

The proposed change aims to distinguish between genuinely (or directly) unused bindings and transitively (or indirectly) unused bindings. While the warnings for directly unused bindings remain unchanged, the warnings for indirectly unused bindings will now be controlled by a new flag, ``-freport-indirectly-unused-bindings``, which is enabled by default.

**Criteria for Transitively Unused Bindings:**

1. **Directly Unused Bindings:** A binding is considered directly unused if it is not referenced in any part of the code. These bindings will generate the usual warnings as before.

> 2. **Transitively Unused Bindings:** A binding is classified as transitively unused if it is used only within other (directly or indirectly) unused bindings. The warning for these bindings will be reported only if ``-freport-indirectly-unused-bindings` and the relevant existing warning flags (e.g., ``-Wunused-top-binds``, ``-Wunused-local-binds``) are enabled.

Reviewer 3: Typesetting bug: too much typewriter font

>     An notable exception here is that local bindings are *not* considered transitively unused just because the top-level binding they are defined in is unused. They are only considered transitively unused if they are unused within the scope of the top-level definition. This is to avoid generating a lot of unhelpful warnings in these cases.

Reviewer 3: Typesetting bug: this para comes out in grey with a sidebar

3. **Recursive and Mutual Recursive Bindings** 
    - If a binding is used only recursively, it is treated as unused.
    - For mutually recursive bindings, if none of the bindings in the group are used outside their mutual recursion, each binding in the group is considered transitively unused. The warning for each binding will list the other bindings in the group it is directly involved with, e.g.

    ::
    
      Foo.hs:6:1: warning: [-Wunused-top-binds]
          ‘b1’ is defined but used only in the following unused bindings: ‘b2’, ‘b4’

4. **Import and `forall` Bindings:** The proposal also extends to warnings about transitively unused imports and ``forall`` binds. Both are considered to be unused if they are used only in definitions or type declarations of unused bindings, with the same direct vs. indirect distinction.

**Warning References and Messages:**

> - A binding will produce a warning if either

Reviewer 3: Typesetting bug: list not laid out properly (add a blank line)

  - it is directly unused, or
  -  it used only by bindings that are unused *and* produce a warning about being unused (and `-freport-indirectly-unused-bindings` is on)

>     - This means that e.g. if a top-level bind is used only in an unused local bind, both ``-Wunused-top-binds`` *and* ``-Wunused-local-binds`` must be enabled.

Reviewer 3: Typesetting bug: grey sidebar

   For example, suppose ``bar1`` and ``bar2`` appear nowhere else.

   ::

     bar1 (Just v1) = undefined
     bar2 (Just v2) v3 = v3
       where c = v2

   In this example

   - ``c`` is directly unused
   - ``v1`` is directly unused
   - ``v2`` is indirectly unused
   - ``v3`` is *not* indirectly unused, because, while it only occurs in the unused ``bar2``, ``v3`` is not in scope at the at ``bar2``'s definition site.

5. An **imported identifier**, assuming ``-Wunused-imports`` is enabled,

   - is directly unused if it is not mentioned anywhere in the module
   - is indirectly unused if it is referenced only in (directly or indirectly) unused bindings

6. A **forall-bound type variable**, assuming ``-Wunused-foralls`` is enabled,

   - is directly unused if it does not appear in the body of the type
   - is indirectly unused if it only appears in the kind signature of other (directly or indirectly) unused ``forall``-bound type variables in the body of the type

   For example:

   ::

     far :: forall a (b :: a) c . c

>     Here, ``b`` is directly unused, but ``a`` is indirectly unused.

Reviewer 4: Removing a space should fix the formating.
```suggestion
   Here, ``b`` is directly unused, but ``a`` is indirectly unused.
```

**Warning References and Messages:**

- A binding will produce a warning if

  - it is directly unused, or

  - it is indirectly unused and ``-Windirectly-unused-binds`` is enabled

- The warnings for (directly or indirectly) unused bindings will reference all bindings they are used in. For example, if ``-Wunused-top-binds`` and ``-Wunused-local-binds`` are enabled,

  ::

    foo = bar
    baz = pureStrLn "Hi"
      where quux = bar
    bar = ...
    main = baz

  will produce three warnings:

  - ``foo`` is directly unused

  - ``quux`` is directly unused

  - ``bar`` is indirectly unused, and will produce a warning stating

    ::

      warning: [-Wunused-top-binds, -Windirectly-unused-binds]
          ‘bar' is defined but used only in the following unused bindings: ‘foo’, ‘quux’

> - The warning for an unused binding B will reference the innermost (directly or indirectly) unused binding(s) whose right-hand sides mention B. For example, suppose ``bar`` is

Reviewer 4: I think I understand what this rule wants to say, but I think it is a bit unclear. I think because this is an amendment/adding precision to the previous point without explicitly saying so.

Maybe this formulation reflects the meaning more precisely?
```suggestion
- If the warning for an unused binding B would reference multiple nested bindings it will only reference the innermost (directly or indirectly) unused binding(s) of those. For example, suppose ``bar`` is
```

  * A possible advantage is that we could simplify the mechanism by removing the configurability of turning the warnings off.
    This would still give us the benefit of reducing the potential for confusion from these warnings, however users that wish to turn these warnings off could not do so.

  * A disadvantage is that most third-party tools dealing with error messages will likely have a harder time parsing the warning messages.

* A different name could be chosen for the new flag, ``-Windirectly-unused-binds``. For example:
  * ``-freport-indirect-uses``

* Instead of ``-Windirectly-unused-binds``, we could separate each warning flag (like ``-Wunused-imports``)
  into two (like ``-Windirectly-unused-imports`` and ``-Wdirectly-unused-imports``) and a warnings group like ``-Wno-indirect-uses`` to turn off all warnings about indirectly unused bindings at once.

  * This would offer more configurability if users want to see some warnings about indirectly unused bindings but not others.

  * It would require a higher number of warning flags.

Implementation Plan
-------------------

> `@Jadefalke256 <https://github.com/Jadefalke256>`_ has `expressed interest <https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/20190#note_505317>`_ in implementing this proposal.

Reviewer 4: The link to the user 404s. I hope they just deleted their github account and are still interested in implementing this?

Author: Not sure, they might have renamed their account. I was planning on asking them again once the proposal is accepted. If they don't have time or motivation anymore, I will find time to implement it.
